---
annotations:
- id: PW:0001756
  parent: classic metabolic pathway
  type: Pathway Ontology
  value: peptide and protein metabolic pathway
authors:
- ReactomeTeam
- Anwesha
- Eweitz
description: Collagen trimers in triple-helical form, referred to as procollagen or
  collagen molecules, are exported from the ER and trafficked through the Golgi network
  before secretion into the extracellular space. For fibrillar collagens namely types
  I, II, III, V, XI, XXIV and XXVII (Gordon & Hahn 2010, Ricard-Blum 2011) secretion
  is concomitant with processing of the N and C terminal collagen propeptides. These
  processed molecules are known as tropocollagens, considered to be the units of higher
  order collagen structures. They form within the extracellular space via a process
  that can proceed spontaneously, but in the cellular environment is regulated by
  many collagen binding proteins such as the FACIT (Fibril Associated Collagens with
  Interrupted Triple helices) family collagens and Small Leucine-Rich Proteoglycans
  (SLRPs). The architecture formed ultimately depends on the collagen subtype and
  the cellular conditions. Structures include the well-known fibrils and fibres formed
  by the major structural collagens type I and II plus several different types of
  supramolecular assembly (Bruckner 2010). The mechanical and physical properties
  of tissues depend on the spatial arrangement and composition of these collagen-containing
  structures (Kadler et al. 1996, Shoulders & Raines 2009, Birk & Bruckner 2011).<br><br>
  Fibrillar collagen structures are frequently heterotypic, composed of a major collagen
  type in association with smaller amounts of other types, e.g. type I collagen fibrils
  are associated with types III and V, while type II fibrils frequently contain types
  IX and XI (Wess 2005). Fibres composed exclusively of a single collagen type probably
  do not exist, as type I and II fibrils require collagens V and XI respectively as
  nucleators (Kadler et al. 2008, Wenstrup et al. 2011).  Much of the structural understanding
  of collagen fibrils has been obtained with fibril-forming collagens, particularly
  type I, but some central features are believed to apply to at least the other fibrillar
  collagen subtypes (Wess 2005). Fibril diameter and length varies considerably, depending
  on the tissue and collagen types (Fang et al. 2012). The reasons for this are poorly
  understood (Wess 2005).<br><br>Some tissues such as skin have fibres that are approximately
  the same diameter while others such as tendon or cartilage have a bimodal distribution
  of thick and thin fibrils. Mature type I collagen fibrils in tendon are up to 1
  cm in length, with a diameter of approx. 500 nm. An individual fibrillar collagen
  triple helix is less than 1.5 nm in diameter and around 300 nm long; collagen molecules
  must assemble to give rise to the higher-order fibril structure, a process known
  as fibrillogenesis, prevented by the presence of C-terminal propeptides (Kadler
  et al. 1987). In electron micrographs, fibrils have a banded appearance, due to
  regular gaps where fewer collagen molecules overlap, which occur because the fibrils
  are aligned in a quarter-stagger arrangement (Hodge & Petruska 1963). Collagen microfibrils
  are believed to have a quasi-hexagonal unit cell, with tropocollagen arranged to
  form supertwisted, right-handed microfibrils that interdigitate with neighbouring
  microfibrils, leading to a spiral-like structure for the mature collagen fibril
  (Orgel et al. 2006, Holmes & Kadler 2006).<br><br>Neighbouring tropocollagen monomers
  interact with each other and are cross-linked covalently by lysyl oxidase (Orgel
  et al. 2000, Maki 2006). Mature collagen fibrils are stabilized by lysyl oxidase-mediated
  cross-links. Hydroxylysyl pyridinoline and lysyl pyridinoline cross-links form between
  (hydroxy) lysine and hydroxylysine residues in bone and cartilage (Eyre et al. 1984).
  Arginoline cross-links can form in cartilage (Eyre et al. 2010); mature bovine articular
  cartilage contains roughly equimolar amounts of arginoline and hydroxylysyl pyridinoline
  based on peptide yields. Mature collagen fibrils in skin are stabilized by the lysyl
  oxidase-mediated cross-link histidinohydroxylysinonorleucine (Yamauch et al. 1987).
  Due to the quarter-staggered arrangement of collagen molecules in a fibril, telopeptides
  most often interact with the triple helix of a neighbouring collagen molecule in
  the fibril, except for collagen molecules in register staggered by 4D from another
  collagen molecule. Fibril aggregation in vitro can be unipolar or bipolar, influenced
  by temperature and levels of C-proteinase, suggesting a role for the N- and C- propeptides
  in regulation of the aggregation process (Kadler et al. 1996). In vivo, collagen
  molecules at the fibril surface may retain their N-propeptides, suggesting that
  this may limit further accretion, or alternatively represents a transient stage
  in a model whereby fibrils grow in diameter through a cycle of deposition, cleavage
  and further deposition (Chapman 1989).<br><br>In vivo, fibrils are often composed
  from more than one type of collagen. Type III collagen is found associated with
  type I collagen in dermal fibrils, with the collagen III on the periphery, suggesting
  a regulatory role (Fleischmajer et al. 1990). Type V collagen associates with type
  I collagen fibrils, where it may limit fibril diameter (Birk et al. 1990, White
  et al. 1997). Type IX associates with the surface of narrow diameter collagen II
  fibrils in cartilage and the cornea (Wu et al. 1992, Eyre et al. 2004). Highly specific
  patterns of crosslinking sites suggest that collagen IX functions in interfibrillar
  networking (Wess 2005). Type XII and XIV collagens are localized near the surface
  of banded collagen I fibrils (Nishiyama et al. 1994). Certain fibril-associated
  collagens with interrupted triple helices (FACITs) associate with the surface of
  collagen fibrils, where they may serve to limit fibril fusion and thereby regulate
  fibril diameter (Gordon & Hahn 2010). Collagen XV, a member of the multiplexin family,
  is almost exclusively associated with the fibrillar collagen network, in very close
  proximity to the basement membrane. In human tissues collagen XV is seen linking
  banded collagen fibers subjacent to the basement membrane (Amenta et al. 2005).
  Type XIV collagen, SLRPs and discoidin domain receptors also regulate fibrillogenesis
  (Ansorge et al. 2009, Kalamajski et al. 2010, Flynn et al. 2010).<br><br>Collagen
  IX is cross-linked to the surface of collagen type II fibrils (Eyre et al. 1987).
  Type XII and XIV collagens are found in association with type I (Walchli et al.
  1994) and type II (Watt et al. 1992, Eyre 2002) fibrils in cartilage. They are thought
  to associate non-covalently via their COL1/NC1 domains (Watt et al. 1992, Eyre 2002).  <br><br>Some
  non-fibrillar collagens form supramolecular assemblies that are distinct from typical
  fibrils. Collagen VII forms anchoring fibrils, composed of antiparallel dimers that
  connect the dermis to the epidermis (Bruckner-Tuderman 2009). During fibrillogenesis,
  the nascent type VII procollagen molecules dimerize in an antiparallel manner. The
  C-propeptides are then removed by Bone morphogenetic protein 1 (Rattenholl et al.
  2002) and the processed antiparallel dimers aggregate laterally. Collagens VIII
  and X form hexagonal networks and collagen VI forms beaded filament (Gordon & Hahn
  2010, Ricard-Blum et al. 2011).  View original pathway at [http://www.reactome.org/PathwayBrowser/#DIAGRAM=2022090
  Reactome].
last-edited: 2021-05-28
organisms:
- Homo sapiens
redirect_from:
- /index.php/Pathway:WP2798
- /instance/WP2798
revision: null
schema-jsonld:
- '@context': https://schema.org/
  '@id': https://wikipathways.github.io/pathways/WP2798.html
  '@type': Dataset
  creator:
    '@type': Organization
    name: WikiPathways
  description: Collagen trimers in triple-helical form, referred to as procollagen
    or collagen molecules, are exported from the ER and trafficked through the Golgi
    network before secretion into the extracellular space. For fibrillar collagens
    namely types I, II, III, V, XI, XXIV and XXVII (Gordon & Hahn 2010, Ricard-Blum
    2011) secretion is concomitant with processing of the N and C terminal collagen
    propeptides. These processed molecules are known as tropocollagens, considered
    to be the units of higher order collagen structures. They form within the extracellular
    space via a process that can proceed spontaneously, but in the cellular environment
    is regulated by many collagen binding proteins such as the FACIT (Fibril Associated
    Collagens with Interrupted Triple helices) family collagens and Small Leucine-Rich
    Proteoglycans (SLRPs). The architecture formed ultimately depends on the collagen
    subtype and the cellular conditions. Structures include the well-known fibrils
    and fibres formed by the major structural collagens type I and II plus several
    different types of supramolecular assembly (Bruckner 2010). The mechanical and
    physical properties of tissues depend on the spatial arrangement and composition
    of these collagen-containing structures (Kadler et al. 1996, Shoulders & Raines
    2009, Birk & Bruckner 2011).<br><br> Fibrillar collagen structures are frequently
    heterotypic, composed of a major collagen type in association with smaller amounts
    of other types, e.g. type I collagen fibrils are associated with types III and
    V, while type II fibrils frequently contain types IX and XI (Wess 2005). Fibres
    composed exclusively of a single collagen type probably do not exist, as type
    I and II fibrils require collagens V and XI respectively as nucleators (Kadler
    et al. 2008, Wenstrup et al. 2011).  Much of the structural understanding of collagen
    fibrils has been obtained with fibril-forming collagens, particularly type I,
    but some central features are believed to apply to at least the other fibrillar
    collagen subtypes (Wess 2005). Fibril diameter and length varies considerably,
    depending on the tissue and collagen types (Fang et al. 2012). The reasons for
    this are poorly understood (Wess 2005).<br><br>Some tissues such as skin have
    fibres that are approximately the same diameter while others such as tendon or
    cartilage have a bimodal distribution of thick and thin fibrils. Mature type I
    collagen fibrils in tendon are up to 1 cm in length, with a diameter of approx.
    500 nm. An individual fibrillar collagen triple helix is less than 1.5 nm in diameter
    and around 300 nm long; collagen molecules must assemble to give rise to the higher-order
    fibril structure, a process known as fibrillogenesis, prevented by the presence
    of C-terminal propeptides (Kadler et al. 1987). In electron micrographs, fibrils
    have a banded appearance, due to regular gaps where fewer collagen molecules overlap,
    which occur because the fibrils are aligned in a quarter-stagger arrangement (Hodge
    & Petruska 1963). Collagen microfibrils are believed to have a quasi-hexagonal
    unit cell, with tropocollagen arranged to form supertwisted, right-handed microfibrils
    that interdigitate with neighbouring microfibrils, leading to a spiral-like structure
    for the mature collagen fibril (Orgel et al. 2006, Holmes & Kadler 2006).<br><br>Neighbouring
    tropocollagen monomers interact with each other and are cross-linked covalently
    by lysyl oxidase (Orgel et al. 2000, Maki 2006). Mature collagen fibrils are stabilized
    by lysyl oxidase-mediated cross-links. Hydroxylysyl pyridinoline and lysyl pyridinoline
    cross-links form between (hydroxy) lysine and hydroxylysine residues in bone and
    cartilage (Eyre et al. 1984). Arginoline cross-links can form in cartilage (Eyre
    et al. 2010); mature bovine articular cartilage contains roughly equimolar amounts
    of arginoline and hydroxylysyl pyridinoline based on peptide yields. Mature collagen
    fibrils in skin are stabilized by the lysyl oxidase-mediated cross-link histidinohydroxylysinonorleucine
    (Yamauch et al. 1987). Due to the quarter-staggered arrangement of collagen molecules
    in a fibril, telopeptides most often interact with the triple helix of a neighbouring
    collagen molecule in the fibril, except for collagen molecules in register staggered
    by 4D from another collagen molecule. Fibril aggregation in vitro can be unipolar
    or bipolar, influenced by temperature and levels of C-proteinase, suggesting a
    role for the N- and C- propeptides in regulation of the aggregation process (Kadler
    et al. 1996). In vivo, collagen molecules at the fibril surface may retain their
    N-propeptides, suggesting that this may limit further accretion, or alternatively
    represents a transient stage in a model whereby fibrils grow in diameter through
    a cycle of deposition, cleavage and further deposition (Chapman 1989).<br><br>In
    vivo, fibrils are often composed from more than one type of collagen. Type III
    collagen is found associated with type I collagen in dermal fibrils, with the
    collagen III on the periphery, suggesting a regulatory role (Fleischmajer et al.
    1990). Type V collagen associates with type I collagen fibrils, where it may limit
    fibril diameter (Birk et al. 1990, White et al. 1997). Type IX associates with
    the surface of narrow diameter collagen II fibrils in cartilage and the cornea
    (Wu et al. 1992, Eyre et al. 2004). Highly specific patterns of crosslinking sites
    suggest that collagen IX functions in interfibrillar networking (Wess 2005). Type
    XII and XIV collagens are localized near the surface of banded collagen I fibrils
    (Nishiyama et al. 1994). Certain fibril-associated collagens with interrupted
    triple helices (FACITs) associate with the surface of collagen fibrils, where
    they may serve to limit fibril fusion and thereby regulate fibril diameter (Gordon
    & Hahn 2010). Collagen XV, a member of the multiplexin family, is almost exclusively
    associated with the fibrillar collagen network, in very close proximity to the
    basement membrane. In human tissues collagen XV is seen linking banded collagen
    fibers subjacent to the basement membrane (Amenta et al. 2005). Type XIV collagen,
    SLRPs and discoidin domain receptors also regulate fibrillogenesis (Ansorge et
    al. 2009, Kalamajski et al. 2010, Flynn et al. 2010).<br><br>Collagen IX is cross-linked
    to the surface of collagen type II fibrils (Eyre et al. 1987). Type XII and XIV
    collagens are found in association with type I (Walchli et al. 1994) and type
    II (Watt et al. 1992, Eyre 2002) fibrils in cartilage. They are thought to associate
    non-covalently via their COL1/NC1 domains (Watt et al. 1992, Eyre 2002).  <br><br>Some
    non-fibrillar collagens form supramolecular assemblies that are distinct from
    typical fibrils. Collagen VII forms anchoring fibrils, composed of antiparallel
    dimers that connect the dermis to the epidermis (Bruckner-Tuderman 2009). During
    fibrillogenesis, the nascent type VII procollagen molecules dimerize in an antiparallel
    manner. The C-propeptides are then removed by Bone morphogenetic protein 1 (Rattenholl
    et al. 2002) and the processed antiparallel dimers aggregate laterally. Collagens
    VIII and X form hexagonal networks and collagen VI forms beaded filament (Gordon
    & Hahn 2010, Ricard-Blum et al. 2011).  View original pathway at [http://www.reactome.org/PathwayBrowser/#DIAGRAM=2022090
    Reactome].
  keywords:
  - -NC2 hexamer
  - '1'
  - '3,4-Hyp 5-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '3,4-Hyp 5-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '3,4-Hyp 5-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '3,4-Hyp 5-Hyl-collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '3,4-Hyp Glu-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '3,4-Hyp Glu-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '3,4-hydroxyprolyl collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '3,4-hydroxyprolyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '3Hyp-4Hyp-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL8A1(?-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL10A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL1A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL1A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL27A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL3A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL6A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL6A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL7A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL8A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - '4-Hyp 5-Gal-Hyl collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '4-Hyp 5-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '4-Hyp 5-Hyl collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '4-Hyp 5-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '4-Hyp Glu-Gal-Hyl collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '4-Hyp Glu-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '4-hydroxyprolyl collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '4-hydroxyprolyl collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '5-Gal-Hyl collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '5-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '5-hydroxylysyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - '5-hydroxylysyl-collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - '5Hyl-COL10A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - '5Hyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - '5Hyl-COL1A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL1A2 '
  - '5Hyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - '5Hyl-COL27A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - '5Hyl-COL3A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL6A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL6A2 '
  - '5Hyl-COL7A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - '5Hyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - '5Hyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - '5Hyl-COL8A2 '
  - '5Hyl-COL9A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL9A2 '
  - '5Hyl-COL9A3 '
  - Anchoring fibril
  - 'BMP1 '
  - BPAG1e:Plectin
  - 'Br- '
  - C-proteinases
  - CD151
  - 'CD151 '
  - 'COL10A1 '
  - COL15A1(1212-1388)
  - 'COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - COL15A1(?-1211)
  - COL18A1(1572-11754)
  - 'COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - COL18A1(?-1571)
  - 'COL1A1 '
  - 'COL1A2 '
  - 'COL24A1(?-?) '
  - 'COL27A1 '
  - 'COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - 'COL3A1 '
  - 'COL6A1 '
  - 'COL6A2 '
  - 'COL7A1 '
  - 'COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - 'COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - 'COL8A1(28-744) '
  - 'COL8A2 '
  - 'COL9A1 '
  - 'COL9A2 '
  - 'COL9A3 '
  - 'CTSB(80-126) '
  - 'CTSL(114-288) '
  - 'CTSL(292-333) '
  - 'CTSL2 '
  - 'CTSS '
  - Collagen
  - Collagen IV
  - 'Collagen IV '
  - 'Collagen V '
  - 'Collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - 'Collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - 'Collagen alpha-3(VI) chains '
  - 'Collagen alpha-5(VI) chains '
  - 'Collagen alpha-6(VI) chains '
  - Collagen fibres
  - Collagen fibrils
  - Collagen networks
  - Collagen type
  - Collagen type I
  - 'Collagen type I fibre '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with deH-HLNL '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with dehydro-lysinonorleucine '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with hydroxylysino-5-ketonorleucine crosslinks '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with hydroxylysyl-pyridinoline cross-links '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with hydroxylysyl-pyrrole cross-links '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with lysino-5-ketonorleucine cross-links '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with lysyl-pyridinoline cross-links '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril with lysyl-pyrrole cross-links '
  - Collagen type I, II
  - Collagen type II
  - 'Collagen type II fibre '
  - 'Collagen type II fibril '
  - 'Collagen type III fibre '
  - 'Collagen type III fibril '
  - Collagen type IV
  - 'Collagen type IV alpha1.alpha1.alpha2 network '
  - 'Collagen type IV alpha1.alpha2.alpha5.alpha6 network '
  - 'Collagen type IV alpha3.alpha4.alpha5 network '
  - Collagen type IX
  - 'Collagen type V fibre '
  - 'Collagen type VI network '
  - Collagen type VII
  - 'Collagen type VII fibril '
  - 'Collagen type VIII network '
  - Collagen type X
  - 'Collagen type X network '
  - Collagen type X:type
  - Collagen type XI
  - 'Collagen type XI fibre '
  - 'Collagen type XI fibril '
  - 'Collagen type XII fibril '
  - Collagen type XII,
  - 'Collagen type XIV '
  - Collagen type XV
  - Collagen type XVII
  - 'Collagen type XVII fibril '
  - Collagen type XVIII
  - 'Collagen type XXIV fibre '
  - 'Collagen type XXIV fibril '
  - 'Collagen type XXVII fibre '
  - 'Collagen type XXVII fibril '
  - 'Cu2+ '
  - 'DST-3 '
  - Endostatin releasing
  - 'GalHyl-COL10A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - 'GalHyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - 'GalHyl-COL1A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL1A2 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - 'GalHyl-COL27A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - 'GalHyl-COL3A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL6A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL6A2 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL7A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - 'GalHyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - 'GalHyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - 'GalHyl-COL8A2 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL10A1 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL15A1(28-1388) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL18A1(24-1754) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL1A1 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL1A2 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL24A1(?-?) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL27A1 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL2A1(182-1241) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL3A1(154-1241) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL6A1 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL6A2 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL7A1 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL7A1(17-2821) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL7A1(2822-2944) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL8A1(28-744) '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL8A2 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - 'Glu-Gal-Hyl collagen alpha-2(XI) chain '
  - 'Glu-Gal-Hyl-collagen alpha-1(XI) chain '
  - H2O
  - H2O2
  - I
  - I,II:XII,XIV
  - II fibrils
  - 'ITGA6(24-1130) '
  - 'ITGB4 '
  - 'LAMA3 '
  - 'LAMB3 '
  - 'LAMC2 '
  - 'LOX '
  - 'LOX(22-168) '
  - 'LOX(22-417) '
  - 'LOXL1 '
  - 'LOXL1(26-574) '
  - 'LOXL1(26-94) '
  - 'LOXL2 '
  - 'LOXL2(26-?) '
  - 'LOXL2(?-774) '
  - 'LOXL3 '
  - 'LOXL3(26-?) '
  - 'LOXL3(?-753) '
  - 'LOXL4 '
  - 'LOXL4(25-?) '
  - 'LOXL4(?-756) '
  - Laminin-332
  - Lysyl oxidase
  - Lysyl oxidases
  - Lysyl oxidases:Cu2+
  - 'MMP13 '
  - 'MMP20 '
  - 'MMP3(100-477) '
  - 'MMP7(95-267) '
  - 'MMP9(107-707) '
  - NC2 proteinases
  - NH3
  - Network forming
  - O2
  - 'PCOLCE '
  - 'PLEC '
  - 'PXDN '
  - PXDN:Br-
  - Procollagen
  - Prolysyl oxidases
  - 'Sulfilimine-containing collagen type IV alpha1.alpha1.alpha2 network '
  - 'Sulfilimine-containing collagen type IV alpha1.alpha2.alpha5.alpha6 network '
  - 'Sulfilimine-containing collagen type IV alpha3.alpha4.alpha5 network '
  - 'TLL1 '
  - 'TLL2 '
  - 'Tropocollagen type IV '
  - 'Tropocollagen type V '
  - Tropocollagens
  - Type I hemidesmosome
  - XIV fibrils
  - allysines
  - alpha-1(VII) NC2
  - alpha-1(VII) trimer
  - alpha6beta4
  - by
  - complex
  - cross-linked
  - cross-links
  - deH-HLNL
  - dehydro-lysinonorleucine crosslinks
  - fibril
  - fibril with
  - fibril with free
  - fibril:Collagen
  - fibril:Integrin
  - fibril:Laminin-332
  - fibrils
  - fibrils with
  - hexamer
  - histidino-hydroxylysinoleucine cross-links
  - hydroxyallysines
  - hydroxylysines
  - hydroxylysino-5-ketonorleucine crosslinks
  - hydroxylysyl-pyridinoline cross-links
  - hydroxylysyl-pyrrole cross-links
  - lysino-5-ketonorleucine cross-links
  - lysyl-pyridinoline
  - lysyl-pyrrole
  - network
  - networks with
  - propeptides
  - proteases
  - region
  - sulfilimine
  - tropocollagens
  - type
  - type II fibril
  - type IX
  - with
  license: CC0
  name: Assembly of collagen fibrils and other multimeric structures
seo: CreativeWork
title: Assembly of collagen fibrils and other multimeric structures
wpid: WP2798
---