---
annotations:
- id: PW:0000819
  parent: signaling pathway
  type: Pathway Ontology
  value: signaling pathway in the innate immune response
authors:
- MaintBot
- MartijnVanIersel
- ReactomeTeam
- Anwesha
- Lifish
description: 'In the complement cascade, a panel of soluble molecules rapidly and
  effectively senses a danger or damage and triggers reactions to provide a response
  that discriminates among foreign intruders, cellular debris, healthy and altered
  host cells (Ricklin D et al. 2010). Complement proteins circulate in the blood stream
  in functionally inactive states. When triggered the complement cascade generates
  enzymatically active molecules (such as C3/C5 convertases) and biological effectors:
  opsonins (C3b, C3d and C4b), anaphylatoxins (C3a and C5a), and C5b, which initiates
  assembly of the lytic membrane attack complex (MAC). Three branches lead to complement
  activation: the classical, lectin and alternative pathways (Kang YH et al. 2009;
  Ricklin D et al. 2010). The classical pathway is initiated by C1 complex binding
  to immune complexes, pentraxins or other targets such as apoptotic cells leading
  to cleavage of C4 and C2 components and formation of the classical C3 convertase,
  C4bC2a. The lectin pathway is activated by binding of mannan-binding lectin (MBL)
  to repetitive carbohydrate residues, or by binding of ficolins to carbohydrate or
  acetylated groups on target surfaces. MBL and ficolins interact with MBL-associated
  serine proteases (MASP) leading to cleavage of C4 and C2 and formation of the classical
  C3 convertase, C4bC2a. The alternative pathway is spontaneously activated by the
  hydrolysis of the internal thioester group of C3 to give C3(H2O). Alternative pathway
  activation involves interaction of C3(H2O) and/or previously generated C3b with
  factor B, which is cleaved by factor D to generate the alternative C3 convertases
  C3(H2O)Bb and/or C3bBb. All three pathways merge at the proteolytic cleavage of
  component C3 by C3 convertases to form opsonin C3b and anaphylatoxin C3a. C3b covalently
  binds to glycoproteins scattered across the target cell surface. This is followed
  by an amplification reaction that generates additional C3 convertases and deposits
  more C3b at the local site. C3b can also bind to C3 convertases switching them to
  C5 convertases, which mediate C5 cleavage leading to MAC formation. Thus, the activation
  of the complement system leads to several important outcomes:  opsonization of target
  cells to enhance phagocytosis, lysis of target cells via membrane attack complex
  (MAC) assembly on the cell surface, production of anaphylatoxins C3a/C5a involved
  in the host inflammatory response, C5a-mediated leukocyte chemotaxis, and clearance
  of antibody-antigen complexes. The complement system is able to distinguish between
  pathological and physiological challenges, i.e. the outcomes of complement activation
  are predetermined by the trigger and are tightly tuned by a combination of initiation
  events with several regulatory mechanisms. These regulatory mechanisms use soluble
  (e.g., C4BP, CFI and CFH) and membrane-bound regulators (e.g., CR1, CD46(MCP), CD55(DAF)
  and CD59) and are coordinated by complement receptors such as CR1, CR2, etc. In
  response to microbial infection complement activation results in flagging microorganisms
  with opsonins for facilitated phagocytosis, formation of MAC on cells such as Gram-negative
  bacteria leading to cell lysis, and release of C3a and C5a to stimulate downstream
  immune responses and to attract leukocytes. Most pathogens can be eliminated by
  these complement-mediated host responses, though some pathogenic microorganisms
  have developed ways of avoiding complement recognition or blocking host complement
  attack resulting in greater virulence (Lambris JD et al. 2008; Serruto D et al.
  2010). All three complement pathways (classical, lectin and alternative) have been
  implicated in clearance of dying cells (Mevorach D et al. 1998; Ogden CA et al.
  2001; Gullstrand B et al.2009; Kemper C et al. 2008). Altered surfaces of apoptotic
  cells are recognized by complement proteins leading to opsonization and subsequent
  phagocytosis. In contrast to pathogens, apoptotic cells are believed to induce only
  a limited complement activation by allowing opsonization of altered surfaces but
  restricting the terminal pathway of MAC formation (Gershov D et al. 2000; Braunschweig
  A and Jozsi M 2011). Thus, opsonization facilitates clearance of dying cells and
  cell debris without triggering danger signals and further inflammatory responses
  (Fraser DA et al. 2007, 2009; Benoit ME et al. 2012). C1q-mediated complement activation
  by apoptotic cells has been shown in a variety of human cells: keratinocytes, human
  umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), Jurkat T lymphoblastoid cells, lung adenocarcinoma
  cells (Korb LC and Ahearn JM 1997; Mold C and Morris CA 2001; Navratil JS et al.
  2001; Nauta AJ et al. 2004). In addition to C1q the opsonization of apoptotic Jurkat
  T cells with MBL also facilitated clearance of these cells by both dendritic cells
  (DC) and macrophages (Nauta AJ et al. 2004). Also C3b, iC3b and C4b deposition on
  apoptotic cells as a consequence of activation of the complement cascade may promote
  complement-mediated phagocytosis. C1q, MBL and cleavage fragments of C3/C4 can bind
  to several receptors expressed on macrophages (e.g. cC1qR (calreticulin), CR1, CR3,
  CR4) suggesting a potential clearance mechanism through this interaction (Mevorach
  D et al. 1998; Ogden CA et al. 2001). Apoptosis is also associated with an altered
  expression of complement regulators on the surface of apoptotic cells. CD46 (MCP)
  bound to the plasma membrane of a healthy cell protects it from complement-mediated
  attack by preventing deposition of C3b and C4b, and reduced expression of CD46 on
  dying cells may lead to enhanced opsonization (Elward K et al. 2005). Upregulation
  of CD55 (DAF) and CD59 on apoptotic cell surfaces may protect damaged cells against
  complement mediated lysis (Pedersen ED et al. 2007; Iborra A et al. 2003; Hensel
  F et al. 2001). In addition, fluid-phase complement regulators such as C4BP, CFH
  may also inhibit lysis of apoptotic cells by limiting complement activation (Trouw
  LA et al 2007; Braunschweig A and Jozsi M. 2011). Complement facilitates the clearance
  of immune complexes (IC) from the circulation (Chevalier J and Kazatchkine MD 1989;
  Nielsen CH et al. 1997). Erythrocytes bear clusters of complement receptor 1 (CR1
  or CD35), which serves as an immune adherence receptor for C3 and/or C4 fragments
  deposited on IC that are shuttled to liver and spleen, where IC are transferred
  and processed by tissue macrophages through an Fc receptor-mediated process. Complement
  proteins are always present in the blood and a small percentage spontaneously activate.
  Inappropriate activation leads to host cell damage, so on healthy human cells any
  complement activation or amplification is strictly regulated by surface-bound regulators
  that accelerate decay of the convertases (CR1, CD55), act as a cofactor for the
  factor I (CFI)-mediated degradation of C3b and C4b (CR1, CD46), or prevent the formation
  of MAC (CD59). Soluble regulators such as C4BP, CFH and FHL1 recognize self surface
  pattern-like glycosaminoglycans and further impair activation. Complement components
  interact with other biological systems. Upon microbial infection complement acts
  in cooperation with Toll-like receptors (TLRs) to amplify innate host defense. Anaphylatoxin
  C5a binds C5a receptor (C5aR) resulting in a synergistic enhancement of the TLR
  and C5aR-mediated proinflammatory cytokine response to infection. This interplay
  is negatively modulated by co-ligation of TLR and the second C5a receptor, C5L2,
  suggesting the existence of complex immunomodulatory interactions (Kohl J 2006;
  Hajishengallis G and Lambris JD 2010). In addition to C5aR and C5L2, complement
  receptor 3 (CR3) facilitates TLR2 or TLR4 signaling pathways by promoting a recruitment
  of their sorting adaptor TIRAP (MAL) to the receptor complex (van Bruggen R et al.
  2007; Kagan JC and Medzhitov R 2006). Complement may activate platelets or facilitate
  biochemical and morphological changes in the endothelium potentiating coagulation
  and contributing to homeostasis in response to injury (Oikonomopoulou K et al. 2012).
  The interplay of complement and coagulation also involves cleavage of C3 and C5
  convertases by coagulation proteases, generating biologically active anaphylatoxins
  (Amara U et al. 2010). Complement is believed to link the innate response to both
  humoral and cell-mediated immunity (Toapanta FR and Ross TM 2006; Mongini PK et
  al. 1997). The majority of published data is based on experiments using mouse as
  a model organism. Further characterization of the influence of complement on B or
  T cell activation is required for the human system, since differences between murine
  models and the human system are not yet fully determined. Complement is also involved
  in regulation of mobilization and homing of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
  (HSPCs) from bone marrow to the circulation and peripheral tissue in order to accommodate
  blood cell replenishment (Reca R et al. 2006). Thus, the complement system orchestrates
  the host defense by sensing a danger signal and transmitting it into specific cellular
  responses while extensively communicating with associated biological pathways ranging
  from immunity and inflammation to homeostasis and development. Originally the larger
  fragment of Complement Factor 2 (C2) was designated C2a. However, complement scientists
  decided that the smaller of all C fragments should be designated with an ''a'',
  the larger with a ''b'', changing the nomenclature for C2. Recent literature may
  use the updated nomenclature and refer to the larger C2 fragment as C2b, and refer
  to the classical C3 convertase as C4bC2b. Throughout this pathway Reactome adheres
  to the original convention to agree with the current (Sep 2013) Uniprot names for
  C2 fragments. The complement cascade pathway is organised into the following sections:
  initial triggering, activation of C3 and C5, terminal pathway and regulation.  View
  original pathway at [http://www.reactome.org/PathwayBrowser/#DIAGRAM=166658 Reactome].'
last-edited: 2021-01-25
organisms:
- Homo sapiens
redirect_from:
- /index.php/Pathway:WP1798
- /instance/WP1798
revision: null
schema-jsonld:
- '@context': https://schema.org/
  '@id': https://wikipathways.github.io/pathways/WP1798.html
  '@type': Dataset
  creator:
    '@type': Organization
    name: WikiPathways
  description: 'In the complement cascade, a panel of soluble molecules rapidly and
    effectively senses a danger or damage and triggers reactions to provide a response
    that discriminates among foreign intruders, cellular debris, healthy and altered
    host cells (Ricklin D et al. 2010). Complement proteins circulate in the blood
    stream in functionally inactive states. When triggered the complement cascade
    generates enzymatically active molecules (such as C3/C5 convertases) and biological
    effectors: opsonins (C3b, C3d and C4b), anaphylatoxins (C3a and C5a), and C5b,
    which initiates assembly of the lytic membrane attack complex (MAC). Three branches
    lead to complement activation: the classical, lectin and alternative pathways
    (Kang YH et al. 2009; Ricklin D et al. 2010). The classical pathway is initiated
    by C1 complex binding to immune complexes, pentraxins or other targets such as
    apoptotic cells leading to cleavage of C4 and C2 components and formation of the
    classical C3 convertase, C4bC2a. The lectin pathway is activated by binding of
    mannan-binding lectin (MBL) to repetitive carbohydrate residues, or by binding
    of ficolins to carbohydrate or acetylated groups on target surfaces. MBL and ficolins
    interact with MBL-associated serine proteases (MASP) leading to cleavage of C4
    and C2 and formation of the classical C3 convertase, C4bC2a. The alternative pathway
    is spontaneously activated by the hydrolysis of the internal thioester group of
    C3 to give C3(H2O). Alternative pathway activation involves interaction of C3(H2O)
    and/or previously generated C3b with factor B, which is cleaved by factor D to
    generate the alternative C3 convertases C3(H2O)Bb and/or C3bBb. All three pathways
    merge at the proteolytic cleavage of component C3 by C3 convertases to form opsonin
    C3b and anaphylatoxin C3a. C3b covalently binds to glycoproteins scattered across
    the target cell surface. This is followed by an amplification reaction that generates
    additional C3 convertases and deposits more C3b at the local site. C3b can also
    bind to C3 convertases switching them to C5 convertases, which mediate C5 cleavage
    leading to MAC formation. Thus, the activation of the complement system leads
    to several important outcomes:  opsonization of target cells to enhance phagocytosis,
    lysis of target cells via membrane attack complex (MAC) assembly on the cell surface,
    production of anaphylatoxins C3a/C5a involved in the host inflammatory response,
    C5a-mediated leukocyte chemotaxis, and clearance of antibody-antigen complexes.
    The complement system is able to distinguish between pathological and physiological
    challenges, i.e. the outcomes of complement activation are predetermined by the
    trigger and are tightly tuned by a combination of initiation events with several
    regulatory mechanisms. These regulatory mechanisms use soluble (e.g., C4BP, CFI
    and CFH) and membrane-bound regulators (e.g., CR1, CD46(MCP), CD55(DAF) and CD59)
    and are coordinated by complement receptors such as CR1, CR2, etc. In response
    to microbial infection complement activation results in flagging microorganisms
    with opsonins for facilitated phagocytosis, formation of MAC on cells such as
    Gram-negative bacteria leading to cell lysis, and release of C3a and C5a to stimulate
    downstream immune responses and to attract leukocytes. Most pathogens can be eliminated
    by these complement-mediated host responses, though some pathogenic microorganisms
    have developed ways of avoiding complement recognition or blocking host complement
    attack resulting in greater virulence (Lambris JD et al. 2008; Serruto D et al.
    2010). All three complement pathways (classical, lectin and alternative) have
    been implicated in clearance of dying cells (Mevorach D et al. 1998; Ogden CA
    et al. 2001; Gullstrand B et al.2009; Kemper C et al. 2008). Altered surfaces
    of apoptotic cells are recognized by complement proteins leading to opsonization
    and subsequent phagocytosis. In contrast to pathogens, apoptotic cells are believed
    to induce only a limited complement activation by allowing opsonization of altered
    surfaces but restricting the terminal pathway of MAC formation (Gershov D et al.
    2000; Braunschweig A and Jozsi M 2011). Thus, opsonization facilitates clearance
    of dying cells and cell debris without triggering danger signals and further inflammatory
    responses (Fraser DA et al. 2007, 2009; Benoit ME et al. 2012). C1q-mediated complement
    activation by apoptotic cells has been shown in a variety of human cells: keratinocytes,
    human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), Jurkat T lymphoblastoid cells,
    lung adenocarcinoma cells (Korb LC and Ahearn JM 1997; Mold C and Morris CA 2001;
    Navratil JS et al. 2001; Nauta AJ et al. 2004). In addition to C1q the opsonization
    of apoptotic Jurkat T cells with MBL also facilitated clearance of these cells
    by both dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages (Nauta AJ et al. 2004). Also C3b,
    iC3b and C4b deposition on apoptotic cells as a consequence of activation of the
    complement cascade may promote complement-mediated phagocytosis. C1q, MBL and
    cleavage fragments of C3/C4 can bind to several receptors expressed on macrophages
    (e.g. cC1qR (calreticulin), CR1, CR3, CR4) suggesting a potential clearance mechanism
    through this interaction (Mevorach D et al. 1998; Ogden CA et al. 2001). Apoptosis
    is also associated with an altered expression of complement regulators on the
    surface of apoptotic cells. CD46 (MCP) bound to the plasma membrane of a healthy
    cell protects it from complement-mediated attack by preventing deposition of C3b
    and C4b, and reduced expression of CD46 on dying cells may lead to enhanced opsonization
    (Elward K et al. 2005). Upregulation of CD55 (DAF) and CD59 on apoptotic cell
    surfaces may protect damaged cells against complement mediated lysis (Pedersen
    ED et al. 2007; Iborra A et al. 2003; Hensel F et al. 2001). In addition, fluid-phase
    complement regulators such as C4BP, CFH may also inhibit lysis of apoptotic cells
    by limiting complement activation (Trouw LA et al 2007; Braunschweig A and Jozsi
    M. 2011). Complement facilitates the clearance of immune complexes (IC) from the
    circulation (Chevalier J and Kazatchkine MD 1989; Nielsen CH et al. 1997). Erythrocytes
    bear clusters of complement receptor 1 (CR1 or CD35), which serves as an immune
    adherence receptor for C3 and/or C4 fragments deposited on IC that are shuttled
    to liver and spleen, where IC are transferred and processed by tissue macrophages
    through an Fc receptor-mediated process. Complement proteins are always present
    in the blood and a small percentage spontaneously activate. Inappropriate activation
    leads to host cell damage, so on healthy human cells any complement activation
    or amplification is strictly regulated by surface-bound regulators that accelerate
    decay of the convertases (CR1, CD55), act as a cofactor for the factor I (CFI)-mediated
    degradation of C3b and C4b (CR1, CD46), or prevent the formation of MAC (CD59).
    Soluble regulators such as C4BP, CFH and FHL1 recognize self surface pattern-like
    glycosaminoglycans and further impair activation. Complement components interact
    with other biological systems. Upon microbial infection complement acts in cooperation
    with Toll-like receptors (TLRs) to amplify innate host defense. Anaphylatoxin
    C5a binds C5a receptor (C5aR) resulting in a synergistic enhancement of the TLR
    and C5aR-mediated proinflammatory cytokine response to infection. This interplay
    is negatively modulated by co-ligation of TLR and the second C5a receptor, C5L2,
    suggesting the existence of complex immunomodulatory interactions (Kohl J 2006;
    Hajishengallis G and Lambris JD 2010). In addition to C5aR and C5L2, complement
    receptor 3 (CR3) facilitates TLR2 or TLR4 signaling pathways by promoting a recruitment
    of their sorting adaptor TIRAP (MAL) to the receptor complex (van Bruggen R et
    al. 2007; Kagan JC and Medzhitov R 2006). Complement may activate platelets or
    facilitate biochemical and morphological changes in the endothelium potentiating
    coagulation and contributing to homeostasis in response to injury (Oikonomopoulou
    K et al. 2012). The interplay of complement and coagulation also involves cleavage
    of C3 and C5 convertases by coagulation proteases, generating biologically active
    anaphylatoxins (Amara U et al. 2010). Complement is believed to link the innate
    response to both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (Toapanta FR and Ross TM 2006;
    Mongini PK et al. 1997). The majority of published data is based on experiments
    using mouse as a model organism. Further characterization of the influence of
    complement on B or T cell activation is required for the human system, since differences
    between murine models and the human system are not yet fully determined. Complement
    is also involved in regulation of mobilization and homing of hematopoietic stem/progenitor
    cells (HSPCs) from bone marrow to the circulation and peripheral tissue in order
    to accommodate blood cell replenishment (Reca R et al. 2006). Thus, the complement
    system orchestrates the host defense by sensing a danger signal and transmitting
    it into specific cellular responses while extensively communicating with associated
    biological pathways ranging from immunity and inflammation to homeostasis and
    development. Originally the larger fragment of Complement Factor 2 (C2) was designated
    C2a. However, complement scientists decided that the smaller of all C fragments
    should be designated with an ''a'', the larger with a ''b'', changing the nomenclature
    for C2. Recent literature may use the updated nomenclature and refer to the larger
    C2 fragment as C2b, and refer to the classical C3 convertase as C4bC2b. Throughout
    this pathway Reactome adheres to the original convention to agree with the current
    (Sep 2013) Uniprot names for C2 fragments. The complement cascade pathway is organised
    into the following sections: initial triggering, activation of C3 and C5, terminal
    pathway and regulation.  View original pathway at [http://www.reactome.org/PathwayBrowser/#DIAGRAM=166658
    Reactome].'
  keywords:
  - (ELANE)
  - '1,3-beta-D-glucan '
  - 11xCbxE-PROS1
  - '11xCbxE-PROS1 '
  - Activated
  - Activated C1R:2x
  - Activated C1R:2xC1S
  - Activated C1S
  - Activated thrombin,
  - 'Antigen '
  - Antigen:IgG
  - Antigen:IgG:C1Q:2x
  - Antigen:IgG:C1Q:2xActivated C1R:2xActivated C1S
  - Antigen:IgG:C1Q:2xActivated C1R:SERPING1:2xActivated C1S:SERPING1
  - Antigen:IgG:C1Q:2xC1R:2xC1S
  - Bacterial mannose
  - 'Bacterial mannose surface pattern '
  - C-reactive
  - C1Q
  - 'C1QA '
  - 'C1QB '
  - 'C1QC '
  - 'C1R C-terminal fragment '
  - 'C1R N-terminal fragment '
  - 'C1R(18-705) '
  - C1R:SERPING1
  - 'C1S C-terminal fragment '
  - 'C1S N-terminal fragment '
  - 'C1S(16-688) '
  - C1S:SERPING1
  - C2
  - C2a
  - 'C2a '
  - C2b
  - 'C3 alpha chain '
  - 'C3 beta chain '
  - C3 convertases
  - C3(H2O)
  - C3(H2O):Bb
  - C3(H2O):CFB
  - C3AR1
  - 'C3AR1 '
  - C3AR1:C3a
  - C3a
  - 'C3a '
  - C3a, C5a
  - 'C3a-desArg '
  - C3a-desArg,
  - C3b
  - 'C3b alpha'' '
  - C3b complexes
  - C3b:Bb:C3b:Properdin
  - C3c
  - 'C3c alpha'' chain fragment 1 '
  - 'C3c alpha'' chain fragment 1 precursor '
  - 'C3c alpha'' chain fragment 2 '
  - 'C3d '
  - C3d, C3dg, iC3b
  - C3dg
  - 'C3dg '
  - C3f
  - 'C3f '
  - C4 activators
  - 'C4 alpha '
  - C4 binding
  - C4-binding
  - 'C4A alpha3 '
  - 'C4A alpha4 fragment '
  - 'C4A(1454-1744) '
  - 'C4A(20-675) '
  - 'C4A(956-1336) '
  - 'C4A-derived C4a '
  - 'C4B alpha '
  - 'C4B alpha3 '
  - 'C4B alpha4 fragment '
  - 'C4B(1454-1744) '
  - 'C4B(20-675) '
  - 'C4B(956-1336) '
  - 'C4B-derived C4a '
  - 'C4BPA '
  - 'C4BPB '
  - C4a
  - C4b
  - C4b with hydrolysed
  - C4b-binding
  - C4b-binding protein
  - C4b:C2a:C3b
  - C4bC2a, C3bBb
  - C4c
  - 'C4c '
  - C4c, C3f
  - C4d
  - 'C4d '
  - C4d, iC3b
  - C5
  - 'C5 alpha chain '
  - 'C5 beta chain '
  - C5 convertases
  - 'C5(965-1676) '
  - C5AR1
  - 'C5AR1 '
  - C5AR1:C5a
  - C5AR2
  - 'C5AR2 '
  - C5AR2 ligands
  - C5AR2:C5AR2 ligands
  - C5a
  - 'C5a '
  - C5a-desArg
  - 'C5a-desArg '
  - C5aT
  - C5b
  - 'C5b alpha'' '
  - C5b:C6
  - C5b:C6:C7
  - C5b:C6:C7, C8, C9
  - C5b:C6:C7:C8
  - C5bT
  - C6
  - 'C6 '
  - C7
  - 'C7 '
  - C8
  - 'C8A '
  - 'C8B '
  - 'C8G '
  - C9
  - C9(22-559)
  - 'C9(22-559) '
  - 'CD19 '
  - CD19:CD81
  - CD46
  - 'CD46 '
  - CD46, CR1
  - CD46, CR1:C4b:C3b
  - CD46:Cell
  - CD55
  - 'CD55 '
  - CD55:C3 convertase
  - CD55:C3b
  - CD55:C4b
  - CD59
  - 'CD59 '
  - CD59:C5b-C9
  - 'CD81 '
  - CFB(26-259)
  - CFB(26-764)
  - 'CFB(26-764) '
  - CFB(260-764)
  - 'CFB(260-764) '
  - 'CFD '
  - CFH
  - 'CFH '
  - CFH, CFHR3
  - CFH:C3b
  - CFH:Host cell
  - CFHR dimers
  - 'CFHR1 '
  - 'CFHR2 '
  - 'CFHR3 '
  - CFHR3:C3bBb
  - 'CFHR4 '
  - 'CFHR5 '
  - CFI
  - CFI(19-335)
  - 'CFI(19-335) '
  - CFI(340-583)
  - 'CFI(340-583) '
  - CFI:CD46, CR1:C4b,
  - CFI:CFH,FHR3:C3b
  - CFI:CFH,FHR3:iC3b
  - CFI:CFH:C3b
  - CL-LK:MASP1
  - CLU
  - 'CLU(228-449) '
  - 'CLU(23-227) '
  - CLU:C5b:C6:C7, C8,
  - 'COLEC10 '
  - 'COLEC11 '
  - 'CPB2 '
  - CPN, CBP2
  - 'CPN1 '
  - 'CPN2 '
  - CR1
  - 'CR1 '
  - CR1:C3b
  - CR1:C3bBb, C4bC2a
  - CR1:C4b
  - CR1:iC3b
  - CR2
  - 'CR2 '
  - CR2:C3d,C3dg,iC3b
  - CR2:C3d,C3dg,iC3b:CD19:CD81
  - 'CRP(19-224) '
  - Ca2+
  - 'Ca2+ '
  - Cell
  - Cell surface
  - 'Cell surface '
  - Cell surface:C3b
  - Cell surface:C3b:Bb
  - Cell surface:C3b:CFB
  - Cell surface:C4b
  - Cell surface:C4b:C2a
  - Cell surface:CFH,
  - Complement Factor 4
  - Complement factor 3
  - Complement factor D
  - Complex
  - 'D-fucose '
  - 'ELANE '
  - 'FCN1 '
  - FCN1 dodecamer:MASP1
  - FCN1 ligands
  - FCN1 ligands:FCN1
  - 'FCN2 '
  - FCN2 dodecamer:MASP1
  - FCN2 ligands
  - FCN2 ligands:FCN2
  - 'FCN3 '
  - FCN3 ligands
  - FCN3 ligands:FCN3
  - FCN3 oligomer:MASP1
  - 'GZMM '
  - H2O
  - 'Heparins '
  - Host cell surface
  - 'IGHG1 '
  - 'IGHG2 '
  - 'IGHG3 '
  - 'IGHG4 '
  - 'IGHV(1-?) '
  - 'IGHV1-2 '
  - 'IGHV7-81(1-?) '
  - 'IGKC '
  - 'IGKV1-12 '
  - 'IGKV1-5(23-?) '
  - 'IGKV2-28 '
  - 'IGKV2D-30 '
  - 'IGKV3D-20 '
  - 'IGKV4-1(21-?) '
  - 'IGKVA18(21-?) '
  - 'IGLC1 '
  - 'IGLC2 '
  - 'IGLC3 '
  - 'IGLC6 '
  - 'IGLC7 '
  - 'IGLV(23-?) '
  - 'IGLV1-36(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV1-40(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV1-44(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV10-54(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV11-55(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV2-11(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV2-18(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV2-23(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV2-33(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV3-12(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV3-16(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV3-22(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV3-25(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV3-27(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV4-3(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV4-60(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV4-69(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV5-37(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV5-45(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV7-43(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV7-46(1-?) '
  - 'IGLV8-61(1-?) '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-I region EU '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-I region HG3 '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-II region ARH-77 '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-II region MCE '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-II region NEWM '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-II region OU '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-II region WAH '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region BRO '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region BUT '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region CAM '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region DOB '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region JON '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region KOL '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region TRO '
  - 'Ig heavy chain V-III region WEA '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V region EV15 '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region AG '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region AU '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region BAN '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region DEE '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region Daudi '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region Gal '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region HK101 '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-I region Wes '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-II region Cum '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-II region FR '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-II region RPMI 6410 '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-III region B6 '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-III region POM '
  - 'Ig kappa chain V-III region VG '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V region 4A '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-I region HA '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-I region NEW '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-I region NEWM '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-I region VOR '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-II region BOH '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-II region MGC '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-II region NEI '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-II region TOG '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-III region LOI '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-III region SH '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-IV region Bau '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-IV region Hil '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-IV region Kern '
  - 'Ig lambda chain V-VI region AR '
  - 'IgH  heavy chain V-III region VH26 precursor '
  - 'Lipoteichoic acid '
  - 'MASP1(20-448) '
  - 'MASP1(20-699) '
  - 'MASP1(449-699) '
  - 'MASP2-1 '
  - 'MASP2-1(16-444) '
  - 'MASP2-1(445-686) '
  - MASPs:carbohydrate
  - 'MBL2 '
  - MBL2 dodecamer:MASP1
  - MBL2,FCN:MASPs:carbohydrate patterns
  - MBL2,FCN:activated
  - 'MBL2,FCN:activated MASPs:carbohydrate patterns '
  - Membrane Attack
  - 'N-acetyl-D-glucosamine '
  - 'N-acetylgalactosamine '
  - 'PCho '
  - Properdin oligomer
  - 'Properdin oligomer '
  - 'S-(L-isoglutamyl)-L-cysteine-C4A(757-1446) '
  - 'S-(L-isoglutamyl)-L-cysteine-C4B(757-1446) '
  - SERPING1
  - 'SERPING1 '
  - 'Sialic acid '
  - VTN
  - 'VTN '
  - VTN:C5b:C6:C7
  - VTN:C5b:C6:C7:C8:C9
  - complexes
  - 'dNQ, ester crosslinked-C4B(757-1446) '
  - 'dNQ-C3(672-1663) '
  - 'dNQ-C4A(757-1446) '
  - 'dNQ-C4B(757-1446) '
  - dimer:4xCa2+
  - dimer:Bacterial
  - dimer:MASP2
  - dimer:MASP2 dimer
  - dimer:MASP2-1
  - dimer:MASP2-1 dimer
  - dimers
  - dodecamer:MASP1
  - iC3b
  - mannose surface
  - multimer:MASP1
  - pattern:4xCa2+
  - patterns
  - pentamer:phosphocholine:C1Q
  - protein
  - protein:C4b
  - protein:C4bC2a
  - protein:Factor I
  - protein:protein S
  - surface
  - surface pattern
  - surface:C3b
  - surface:C3b:Bb:Properdin
  - surface:C3b:CFHR
  - surface:C4b
  - surface:FH,FHR3:C3b
  - thioester
  - 'thrombin heavy chain '
  - 'thrombin light chain '
  license: CC0
  name: Complement cascade
seo: CreativeWork
title: Complement cascade
wpid: WP1798
---