---
annotations:
- id: PW:0000683
  parent: signaling pathway
  type: Pathway Ontology
  value: integrin mediated cell-cell signaling pathway
authors:
- ReactomeTeam
- Anwesha
- DeSl
description: The extracellular matrix is a component of all mammalian tissues, a network
  consisting largely of the fibrous proteins collagen, elastin and associated-microfibrils,
  fibronectin and laminins embedded in a viscoelastic gel of anionic proteoglycan
  polymers. It performs many functions in addition to its structural role; as a major
  component of the cellular microenvironment it influences cell behaviours such as
  proliferation, adhesion and migration, and regulates cell differentiation and death
  (Hynes 2009). <br><br>ECM composition is highly heterogeneous and dynamic, being
  constantly remodeled (Frantz et al. 2010) and modulated, largely by matrix metalloproteinases
  (MMPs) and growth factors that bind to the ECM influencing the synthesis, crosslinking
  and degradation of ECM components (Hynes 2009). ECM remodeling is involved in the
  regulation of cell differentiation processes such as the establishment and maintenance
  of stem cell niches, branching morphogenesis, angiogenesis, bone remodeling, and
  wound repair. Redundant mechanisms modulate the expression and function of ECM modifying
  enzymes. Abnormal ECM dynamics can lead to deregulated cell proliferation and invasion,
  failure of cell death, and loss of cell differentiation, resulting in congenital
  defects and pathological processes including tissue fibrosis and cancer.<br><br>Collagen
  is the most abundant fibrous protein within the ECM constituting up to 30% of total
  protein in multicellular animals. Collagen provides tensile strength. It associates
  with elastic fibres, composed of elastin and fibrillin microfibrils, which give
  tissues the ability to recover after stretching. Other ECM proteins such as fibronectin,
  laminins, and matricellular proteins participate as connectors or linking proteins
  (Daley et al. 2008).<br><br>Chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate and keratan sulfate
  proteoglycans are structural components associated with collagen fibrils (Scott
  & Haigh 1985; Scott & Orford 1981), serving to tether the fibril to the surrounding
  matrix. Decorin belongs to the small leucine-rich repeat proteoglycan family (SLRPs)
  which also includes biglycan, fibromodulin, lumican and asporin. All appear to be
  involved in collagen fibril formation and matrix assembly (Ameye & Young 2002).
  <br><br>ECM proteins such as osteonectin (SPARC), osteopontin and thrombospondins
  -1 and -2, collectively referred to as matricellular proteins (reviewed in Mosher
  & Adams 2012) appear to modulate cell-matrix interactions. In general they induce
  de-adhesion, characterized by disruption of focal adhesions and a reorganization
  of actin stress fibers (Bornstein 2009).  Thrombospondin (TS)-1 and -2 bind MMP2.
  The resulting complex is endocytosed by the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related
  protein (LRP), clearing MMP2 from the ECM (Yang et al. 2001).<br><br>Osteopontin
  (SPP1, bone sialoprotein-1) interacts with collagen and fibronectin (Mukherjee et
  al. 1995). It also contains several cell adhesive domains that interact with integrins
  and CD44.<br><br>Aggrecan is the predominant ECM proteoglycan in cartilage (Hardingham
  & Fosang 1992). Its relatives include versican, neurocan and brevican (Iozzo 1998).
  In articular cartilage the major non-fibrous macromolecules are aggrecan, hyaluronan
  and hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein 1 (HAPLN1). The high negative charge
  density of these molecules leads to the binding of large amounts of water (Bruckner
  2006). Hyaluronan is bound by several large proteoglycans proteoglycans belonging
  to the hyalectan family that form high-molecular weight aggregates (Roughley 2006),
  accounting for the turgid nature of  cartilage. <br><br>The most significant enzymes
  in ECM remodeling are the Matrix Metalloproteinase (MMP) and A disintegrin and metalloproteinase
  with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) families (Cawston & Young 2010). Other notable
  ECM degrading enzymes include plasmin and cathepsin G. Many ECM proteinases are
  initially present as precursors, activated by proteolytic processing. MMP precursors
  include an amino prodomain which masks the catalytic Zn-binding motif (Page-McCawet
  al. 2007). This can be removed by other proteinases, often other MMPs. ECM proteinases
  can be inactivated by degradation, or blocked by inhibitors. Some of these inhibitors,
  including alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-proteinase inhibitor, and alpha1-chymotrypsin
  can inhibit a large variety of proteinases (Woessner & Nagase 2000). The tissue
  inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are potent MMP inhibitors (Brew & Nagase
  2010).  View original pathway at [http://www.reactome.org/PathwayBrowser/#DIAGRAM=1474244
  Reactome].
last-edited: 2021-01-25
organisms:
- Homo sapiens
redirect_from:
- /index.php/Pathway:WP2703
- /instance/WP2703
revision: null
schema-jsonld:
- '@context': https://schema.org/
  '@id': https://wikipathways.github.io/pathways/WP2703.html
  '@type': Dataset
  creator:
    '@type': Organization
    name: WikiPathways
  description: The extracellular matrix is a component of all mammalian tissues, a
    network consisting largely of the fibrous proteins collagen, elastin and associated-microfibrils,
    fibronectin and laminins embedded in a viscoelastic gel of anionic proteoglycan
    polymers. It performs many functions in addition to its structural role; as a
    major component of the cellular microenvironment it influences cell behaviours
    such as proliferation, adhesion and migration, and regulates cell differentiation
    and death (Hynes 2009). <br><br>ECM composition is highly heterogeneous and dynamic,
    being constantly remodeled (Frantz et al. 2010) and modulated, largely by matrix
    metalloproteinases (MMPs) and growth factors that bind to the ECM influencing
    the synthesis, crosslinking and degradation of ECM components (Hynes 2009). ECM
    remodeling is involved in the regulation of cell differentiation processes such
    as the establishment and maintenance of stem cell niches, branching morphogenesis,
    angiogenesis, bone remodeling, and wound repair. Redundant mechanisms modulate
    the expression and function of ECM modifying enzymes. Abnormal ECM dynamics can
    lead to deregulated cell proliferation and invasion, failure of cell death, and
    loss of cell differentiation, resulting in congenital defects and pathological
    processes including tissue fibrosis and cancer.<br><br>Collagen is the most abundant
    fibrous protein within the ECM constituting up to 30% of total protein in multicellular
    animals. Collagen provides tensile strength. It associates with elastic fibres,
    composed of elastin and fibrillin microfibrils, which give tissues the ability
    to recover after stretching. Other ECM proteins such as fibronectin, laminins,
    and matricellular proteins participate as connectors or linking proteins (Daley
    et al. 2008).<br><br>Chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate and keratan sulfate
    proteoglycans are structural components associated with collagen fibrils (Scott
    & Haigh 1985; Scott & Orford 1981), serving to tether the fibril to the surrounding
    matrix. Decorin belongs to the small leucine-rich repeat proteoglycan family (SLRPs)
    which also includes biglycan, fibromodulin, lumican and asporin. All appear to
    be involved in collagen fibril formation and matrix assembly (Ameye & Young 2002).
    <br><br>ECM proteins such as osteonectin (SPARC), osteopontin and thrombospondins
    -1 and -2, collectively referred to as matricellular proteins (reviewed in Mosher
    & Adams 2012) appear to modulate cell-matrix interactions. In general they induce
    de-adhesion, characterized by disruption of focal adhesions and a reorganization
    of actin stress fibers (Bornstein 2009).  Thrombospondin (TS)-1 and -2 bind MMP2.
    The resulting complex is endocytosed by the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related
    protein (LRP), clearing MMP2 from the ECM (Yang et al. 2001).<br><br>Osteopontin
    (SPP1, bone sialoprotein-1) interacts with collagen and fibronectin (Mukherjee
    et al. 1995). It also contains several cell adhesive domains that interact with
    integrins and CD44.<br><br>Aggrecan is the predominant ECM proteoglycan in cartilage
    (Hardingham & Fosang 1992). Its relatives include versican, neurocan and brevican
    (Iozzo 1998). In articular cartilage the major non-fibrous macromolecules are
    aggrecan, hyaluronan and hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein 1 (HAPLN1).
    The high negative charge density of these molecules leads to the binding of large
    amounts of water (Bruckner 2006). Hyaluronan is bound by several large proteoglycans
    proteoglycans belonging to the hyalectan family that form high-molecular weight
    aggregates (Roughley 2006), accounting for the turgid nature of  cartilage. <br><br>The
    most significant enzymes in ECM remodeling are the Matrix Metalloproteinase (MMP)
    and A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) families
    (Cawston & Young 2010). Other notable ECM degrading enzymes include plasmin and
    cathepsin G. Many ECM proteinases are initially present as precursors, activated
    by proteolytic processing. MMP precursors include an amino prodomain which masks
    the catalytic Zn-binding motif (Page-McCawet al. 2007). This can be removed by
    other proteinases, often other MMPs. ECM proteinases can be inactivated by degradation,
    or blocked by inhibitors. Some of these inhibitors, including alpha2-macroglobulin,
    alpha1-proteinase inhibitor, and alpha1-chymotrypsin can inhibit a large variety
    of proteinases (Woessner & Nagase 2000). The tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases
    (TIMPs) are potent MMP inhibitors (Brew & Nagase 2010).  View original pathway
    at [http://www.reactome.org/PathwayBrowser/#DIAGRAM=1474244 Reactome].
  keywords:
  - -5:HSPG2(22-4391)
  - 1,2
  - 332, 411, 512, 521
  - '3Hyp-4Hyp-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-3Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-5Hyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - '3x4Hyp-GlcGalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - 411, 512, 521
  - 521, (211, 221)
  - '5Hyl-COL9A1 '
  - '5Hyl-COL9A2 '
  - '5Hyl-COL9A3 '
  - 'ADAM12 '
  - ADAM12,ADAM15,ADAM19
  - 'ADAM15 '
  - 'ADAM19 '
  - AGRN(30-2045)
  - 'AGRN(30-2045) '
  - AGRN, HSPG2
  - AGRN:Alpha-dystroglycan
  - AGRN:Beta amyloid
  - AGRN:LRP4:MUSK
  - AGRN:Laminins with
  - AGRN:NCAM1, PTPRS
  - 'ASPN '
  - Aggrecan
  - 'Aggrecan '
  - Aggrecan:HA:HAPLN1
  - BGN
  - 'BGN '
  - BGN:Collagen types
  - Beta amyloid fibril
  - 'Beta amyloid fibril '
  - 'Brevican '
  - 'C4S-BGN '
  - 'C6S-BGN '
  - CEACAM heterodimer
  - 'CEACAM1 '
  - 'CEACAM6 '
  - 'CEACAM8 '
  - 'COL18A1(1572-11754) '
  - 'COL9A1 '
  - 'COL9A2 '
  - 'COL9A3 '
  - 'COMP '
  - COMP interactors
  - COMP pentamer
  - COMP pentamer:COMP
  - 'CSE-BGN '
  - Ca2+
  - 'Ca2+ '
  - Collagen
  - Collagen IV
  - 'Collagen IV '
  - 'Collagen V '
  - Collagen formation
  - Collagen type
  - Collagen type I
  - 'Collagen type I fibre '
  - 'Collagen type I fibril '
  - Collagen type I, II,
  - 'Collagen type II fibril '
  - 'Collagen type III fibril '
  - Collagen type IV
  - 'Collagen type IV alpha1.alpha1.alpha2 network '
  - 'Collagen type IV alpha1.alpha2.alpha5.alpha6 network '
  - 'Collagen type IV alpha3.alpha4.alpha5 network '
  - 'Collagen type VI fibril '
  - 'Collagen type VI network '
  - Collagen type VII
  - 'Collagen type VII fibril '
  - 'Collagen type X fibril '
  - 'Collagen type XI fibril '
  - Collagen types I,
  - Collagen types I-V,
  - Collagen types II,
  - DAG1(30-653)
  - 'DAG1(30-653) '
  - 'DAG1(654-895) '
  - DCN
  - 'DCN '
  - DCN:Collagen type I,
  - 'DDR1 '
  - DDR1 dimer
  - DDR1 dimer:Collagen
  - 'DDR2 '
  - DDR2 dimer
  - DDR2 dimer:Collagen
  - DMD
  - 'DMD '
  - DMP1
  - 'DMP1 '
  - DMP1:Integrin
  - DSPP(463-1301)
  - 'DSPP(463-1301) '
  - DSPP(463-1301):Integrin alphaVbeta1
  - Degradation of the
  - Dystroglycan
  - Dystroglycan:AGRN:HSPG2
  - Dystroglycan:Dystrophin:Laminins
  - Dystroglycan:NRXN1
  - Elastic fibre
  - Endostatin dimer
  - 'FGF2(10-155) '
  - FGF2(10-155),
  - FN1 dimer
  - FN1(32-2386)
  - 'FN1(32-2386) '
  - FN1(32-2386):Collagen types I-V, VII
  - Fibronectin matrix
  - 'Fibronectin matrix '
  - Fibronectn matrix,
  - 'GalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - 'GalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL9A1 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL9A2 '
  - 'GlcGalHyl-COL9A3 '
  - HA
  - 'HA '
  - HAPLN1
  - 'HAPLN1 '
  - HSPG2(22-4391)
  - 'HSPG2(22-4391) '
  - HSPG2:Dystroglycan
  - HSPG2:FGF2(10-155),
  - Hydroxylapatite
  - 'Hydroxylapatite '
  - I
  - I, VI, (IX)
  - I,IV,VI
  - IBSP
  - 'IBSP '
  - IBSP:Collagen type I
  - II, III
  - II, III, VI fibrils
  - II,III,V
  - III
  - III, IV, V, XI
  - III, V
  - III, V, X fibrils
  - III, VI fibrils
  - 'ITGA1 '
  - 'ITGA2 '
  - 'ITGA2B(32-1039) '
  - 'ITGA3(33-1051) '
  - 'ITGA5(42-894) '
  - 'ITGA6(24-1130) '
  - 'ITGA7(34-1181) '
  - 'ITGA8(39-1063) '
  - 'ITGA9 '
  - 'ITGAV(31-1048) '
  - 'ITGAX '
  - 'ITGB1 '
  - 'ITGB3 '
  - 'ITGB4 '
  - 'ITGB5 '
  - 'ITGB6 '
  - IV, V, XI fibrils
  - Integrin
  - Integrin alpha2beta1
  - Integrin alpha5beta1
  - Integrin alpha6beta1
  - Integrin alpha7beta1
  - Integrin alphaVbeta1
  - Integrin alphaVbeta3
  - Integrin cell
  - Integrins
  - 'KS(2),C4S-ACAN '
  - 'KS(2),C6S-ACAN '
  - 'KS(2),CSE-ACAN '
  - 'KS(2)-FMOD '
  - 'LAMA1 '
  - 'LAMA2 '
  - 'LAMA3 '
  - 'LAMA4 '
  - 'LAMA5 '
  - 'LAMB1 '
  - 'LAMB2 '
  - 'LAMB3 '
  - 'LAMC1 '
  - 'LAMC2 '
  - 'LAMC3 '
  - 'LRP4 '
  - LRP4:MUSK
  - 'LUM '
  - Laminin network
  - Laminin-111
  - Laminin-111:Endostatin dimer
  - Laminin-211, 221,
  - Laminin-332
  - Laminins
  - Laminins with
  - Laminins-332, 511,
  - Laminins:Sulfatide
  - Lecticans
  - 'MATN1 '
  - 'MATN3 '
  - 'MATN4 '
  - 'MUSK '
  - Mn2+
  - 'Mn2+ '
  - N)
  - N):Fibronectin
  - N):Lecticans
  - 'NCAM1 '
  - NCAM1, PTPRS
  - 'NID1 '
  - 'NID2 '
  - NRXN1
  - 'NRXN1 '
  - NTN4
  - 'NTN4 '
  - NTN4:Laminins with
  - 'Neurocan '
  - Nidogens 1, 2
  - On the basis of their fibre architecture in tissues, the genetically distinct
    collagens have been divided into subgroups. Group 1 collagens have uninterrupted
    triple-helical domains of about 300 nm, forming large extracellular fibrils. They
    are referred to as the fibril-forming collagens, consisting of collagens types
    I, II, III, V, XI, XXIV and XXVII.  Group 2 collagens are types IV and VII, which
    have extended triple helices (>350 nm) with imperfections in the Gly-X-Y repeat
    sequences. Group 3 are the short-chain collagens. These have two subgroups. Group
    3A have continuous triple-helical domains (type VI, VIII and X). Group 3B have
    interrupted triple-helical domains, referred to as the fibril-associated collagens
    with interrupted triple helices (FACIT collagens, Shaw & Olsen 1991). FACITs include
    collagen IX, XII, XIV, XVI, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII and XXVI plus the transmembrane
    collagens (XIII, XVII, XXIII and XXV) and the multiple triple helix domains and
    interruptions (Multiplexin) collagens XV and XVIII (Myllyharju & Kivirikko 2004).  The
    non-collagenous domains of collagens have regulatory functions; several are biologically
    active when cleaved from the main peptide chain. Fibrillar collagen peptides all
    have a large triple helical domain (COL1) bordered by N and C terminal extensions,
    called the N- and C-propeptides, which are cleaved prior to formation of the collagen
    fibril. The intact form is referred to as a collagen propeptide, not procollagen,
    which is used to refer to the trimeric triple-helical precursor of collagen before
    the propeptides are removed. The C-propeptide, also called the NC1 domain, directs
    chain association during assembly of the procollagen molecule from its three constituent
    alpha chains (Hulmes 2002).<br><br>Fibril forming collagens are the most familiar
    and best studied subgroup. Collagen fibres are aggregates or bundles of collagen
    fibrils, which are themselves polymers of tropocollagen complexes, each consisting
    of three polypeptide chains known as alpha chains. Tropocollagens are considered
    the subunit of larger collagen structures. They are approximately 300 nm long
    and 1.5 nm in diameter, with a left-handed triple-helical structure, which becomes
    twisted into a right-handed coiled-coil 'super helix' in the collagen fibril.
    Tropocollagens in the extracellular space polymerize spontaneously with regularly
    staggered ends (Hulmes 2002). In fibrillar collagens the molecules are staggered
    by about 67 nm, a unit known as D that changes depending upon the hydration state.
    Each D-period contains slightly more than four collagen molecules so that every
    D-period repeat of the microfibril has a region containing five molecules in cross-section,
    called the 'overlap', and a region containing only four molecules, called the
    'gap'. The triple-helices are arranged in a hexagonal or quasi-hexagonal array
    in cross-section, in both the gap and overlap regions (Orgel et al. 2006). Collagen
    molecules cross-link covalently to each other via lysine and hydroxylysine side
    chains. These cross-links are unusual, occuring only in collagen and elastin,
    a related protein.<br><br>The macromolecular structures of collagen are diverse.
    Several group 3 collagens associate with larger collagen fibers, serving as molecular
    bridges which stabilize the organization of the extracellular matrix. Type IV
    collagen is arranged in an interlacing network within the dermal-epidermal junction
    and vascular basement membranes. Type VI collagen forms distinct microfibrils
    called beaded filaments. Type VII collagen forms anchoring fibrils. Type VIII
    and X collagens form hexagonal networks. Type XVII collagen is a component of
    hemidesmosomes where it is complexed wtih alpha6Beta4 integrin, plectin, and laminin-332
    (de Pereda et al. 2009). Type XXIX collagen has been recently reported to be a
    putative epidermal collagen with highest expression in suprabasal layers (Soderhall
    et al. 2007). Collagen fibrils/aggregates arranged in varying combinations and
    concentrations in different tissues provide specific tissue properties. In bone,
    collagen triple helices lie in a parallel, staggered array with 40 nm gaps between
    the ends of the tropocollagen subunits, which probably serve as nucleation sites
    for the deposition of  crystals of the mineral component, hydroxyapatite (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2)
    with some phosphate. Collagen structure affects cell-cell and cell-matrix communication,
    tissue construction in growth and repair, and is changed in development and disease
    (Sweeney et al. 2006, Twardowski et al. 2007). A single collagen fibril can be
    heterogeneous along its axis, with significantly different mechanical properties
    in the gap and overlap regions, correlating with the different molecular organizations
    in these regions (Minary-Jolandan & Yu 2009).
  - 'PDGFA '
  - 'PDGFB (82-190) '
  - 'PI(3,4)P2 '
  - 'PTPRS '
  - SERPINE1
  - 'SERPINE1 '
  - 'SH3PXD2A '
  - SH3PXD2A:PI(3,4)P2
  - SH3PXD2A:PI(3,4)P2:ADAM12,ADAM15,ADAM19
  - SLRPs
  - SLRPs:TGF beta
  - SPARC
  - 'SPARC '
  - Sulfatide
  - 'Sulfatide '
  - Syndecan
  - 'Syndecans bind a wide variety of soluble and insoluble ligands, inckluding extracellular
    matrix components, cell adhesion molecules, growth factors, cytokines, and proteinases.
    As the cleaved ectodomains of syndecans retain the ability to bind ligands, ectodomain
    shedding is a mechanism for releasing soluble effectors that may compete for ligands
    with their cell-bound counterparts (Kainulainen et al. 1998). Shed  ectodomains
    are found in inflammatory fluids (Subramanian et al. 1997) and may induce the
    proliferation of cancer cells (Maeda et al. 2004). '
  - TGF beta
  - 'TGFB1 '
  - 'TGFB2 '
  - 'TGFB3 '
  - 'TNC '
  - TNC:Integrin
  - 'TNN '
  - 'TNR '
  - 'TNXB '
  - 'TTR '
  - Tenascin-C hexamer
  - Tenascins C, R, (X,
  - Transthyretin
  - VI, (IX)
  - VII
  - VTN
  - 'VTN '
  - VTN:Collagen type
  - VTN:Collagen types
  - VTN:Integrins
  - 'Versican '
  - Vitronectin:Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
  - X fibrils
  - alphVbeta3
  - alpha-1, -2 or
  - alpha-1, -2 or -5
  - alpha1beta1,
  - alpha2bbeta3
  - alpha2beta1,
  - alpha2beta1:Laminin-332
  - alpha3beta1,
  - alpha5beta1:FN1
  - alpha5beta1:Fibronectin matrix
  - alpha6beta1,
  - alpha6beta1:Laminin-211, 221, 332, 411, 512, 521
  - alpha6beta4
  - alpha6beta4:Laminins-332, 511, 521, (211, 221)
  - alpha7beta1,
  - alpha7beta1:Laminin-211, 221, 411, 512, 521
  - alpha8beta1,
  - alpha9beta1,
  - alphaVbeta1
  - alphaVbeta1,
  - alphaVbeta1:Laminin-111
  - alphaVbeta3,
  - alphaVbeta5,
  - alphaVbeta6,
  - alphaXbeta1
  - dimer
  - extracellular
  - fibril
  - fibril:Laminin-332
  - fibril:SPARC:Hydroxylapatitie:Ca2+
  - fibrils
  - formation
  - gamma-1
  - gamma-1,
  - gamma-1, gamma-3
  - gamma-3:Nidogens
  - gamma-3:Nidogens:Collagen type IV network
  - gamma-3:Nidogens:HSPG2
  - homodimer
  - homodimer, PDGFB
  - interactions
  - interactors
  - matrix
  - network:Laminin-1
  - networks:Collagen
  - surface
  - tetramer, PDGFA
  - type
  - type I, II, III,
  - type I, II, III, V,
  - type VII fibril
  - with
  license: CC0
  name: Extracellular matrix organization
seo: CreativeWork
title: Extracellular matrix organization
wpid: WP2703
---